# Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis.


## Dataset

* Song dataset -> The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset (http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. Example:

        {"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

* Log dataset -> The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator (https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.


# Project Files
* **[data](data)**: Folder containing data used for this project (I have only included samples)
* **[create_tables.py](create_tables.py)**:  Drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
* **[etl.py](etl.py)**: Reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.
* **[sql_queries.py](sql_queries.py)**: Contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.


# Project Instructions

Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

* Fact Table -> songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `'NextSong'`
            
            Columns: songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
* Dimension Tables:
    
    * users - users in the app
    
            Columns: user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
    * songs - songs in music database

            Columns: song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
    * artists - artists in music database

            Columns: artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
    * time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units

            Columns: start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Project Steps
1. Use `'Create'` statements in sql_queries.py to create the tables
2. Write `'DROP'` statements in sql_queries.py to drop each table if it exists.
3. Run `create_tables.py` to create your database and tables.
4. Run `etl.py` to fill tables


# Database purpose
The purpose of this database is to provide an efficient and easy way for Sparkify to analyse their data.


# Database Schema and Justification
Using a database with a Star Schema to store our data allows us to query/analyse the data in an efficient manner.
a Relational database also allows us to run ad-hoc queries as well for Sparkify.

Start Schema would allow us to store user behaviour in a logical way in several dimensions.
